6 New Year's English
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello, this is 6-minute English from BBCLearningEnglish. I'm Phil
And I'm Beth. Phil, what makes home special for you?
Maybe it's sleeping in your own bed. The view from the window
or a loved family pet. What makes you feel like your home, Phil?
You know what, I think it's just relaxing on my sofa in my living room.
Very nice.
Well, you might not realize it, but for your brain, one of the strongest
identifiers of home is smell. Listen, as BBC presents
as Monty Chesterton and Tristan Arton, describe the smell
which give them the feeling of home. My granddad's house,
smell of pine and damp and mossy books.
I know my mom's perfume, my dad's preferred soap.
This program will be finding out why our sense of smell is so
important to feeling at home, even when we don't notice it.
As always, we'll be introducing some useful new vocabulary
and if you head over to our website, BBCLearningEnglish.com
you'll find a transcript of the program to read along with as you listen
and there's a free worksheet too.
Good idea Beth, but now it's time for my question.
The sense of smell is incredibly powerful, but not everyone has it.
A small amount of the population is an osmic,
meaning they can't smell.
So, according to research at the University of Reading,
what percentage of people have no sense of smell
is it a 2% b5% or c7%?
Oh, I'm going to say b5%.
Well, we'll find out the correct answer later in the program.
Have you ever come back home from holiday and noticed a strange smell in your house?
If you have, don't worry, it's not bad.
In fact, there's a scientific reason for it, as science writer,
Tristan Arton, explained to BBC World Service program
unexpected elements.
One thing I've been thinking about is that every house or home has a smell to it.
You might really notice this in your own home when you come back from a long trip,
and you step to your front door and things smell a little weird.
While there's a good chance your house might smell strange because it's been closed up for a few weeks,
there's also a chance you might be smelling your home as it usually smells,
but you just don't notice it when you're there.
Tristan says that when you return home after being away,
there's a good chance your house smells weird,
an adjective meaning strange or unusual.
If you say there's a good chance that something will happen,
you mean there's a high likelihood or probability of it.
The truth is that every home has a smell,
although we're so used to it, we usually don't notice.
When we breathe in, receptor cells in the nose detect molecules in the air
and send them to old factory organs in the brain.
These analyze the smells for danger.
The reason you can't smell your own home is that it isn't a threat to you.
Here's Science Writer, Tristan Arton again, explaining more to BBC World Service program
unexpected elements.
Well, by filtering out common non-threatening smells,
it makes it easier to detect things out of the ordinary.
That might be dangerous.
So for example, if you forget about your toast and it starts to burn,
you can typically smell that quickly because it's a change to the environment that you're in,
then the other parts of your brain kick in to understand the smell of smoke as a potential harm or threat.
But even if we can't smell our own homes,
the scent of them still matters because it's entangled with our recognition of comfort and security.
By filtering out familiar smells, our brains are able to detect other smells which are out of the ordinary,
unusual or uncommon, and which may be dangerous.
To filter something out means to remove or separate something unwanted from something else.
For example, filtering out the smell of home means we notice the smell of burning toast
or other smells are letting us to possible danger.
Even though we don't usually notice the scent, the particular smell of our home,
it still has an effect on the brain's limbic system, which handles memory and emotion.
This explains why smell has such a strong effect on our feelings,
and why we feel comfortable and safe at home.
Right, Phil, isn't it time to reveal the answer to your question?
Yes, it is.
Why ask you what percentage of the population is an osmic?
That means they can't smell.
And the answer is B5%, which is what you said, I think.
It is, yeah.
Well done.
Okay, let's recap the vocabulary we've learned in this program, starting with an osmic,
meaning having no sense or a limited sense of smell.
The adjective weird means strange odd or bizarre.
When someone says there's a good chance something will happen, they mean it's quite likely to happen.
The phrase out of the ordinary means unusual, uncommon or exceptional.
If you filter something out, you remove or separate something unwanted from substance.
And finally, a scent is a distinctive smell, often a pleasant one,
that it can also mean the smell made by an animal.
Once again, ask six minutes to wrap.
But if you enjoyed listening to this program, you'll find many more along with a worksheet with a quiz you can try on our website,
BBCLearningEnglish.com.
See you there soon.
Bye!